How I Feel After Publishing My First Book
Alex Joonto

4 min read Jun 5, 2023


Thank You, President Corona! is real!
5th of June 2023, Lisbon, Portugal…

Well, ladies and gentlemen… I made it! I published a book! I did something that only 3% of aspiring writers accomplish!

After 3 years of work, Thank You, President Corona! is finally available on several online book stores, like Amazon, Barnes & Nobles, Blackwell’s, eBook.com and Bol.com!

And how do I feel? I feel relieved! I feel like I have no longer to worry about it. I don’t care whether TPC will be the next New York Times Bestseller or a total flop with just 5 copies sold. I just made it! I guess that’s how a woman feels after she gave birth! Finally I delivered what I had to do! And my gestation was 27 months! Not just 9!

I also feel proud. No, not that kind of pride. Just proud of the journey I have completed. You know, for all of my life I struggled with completing projects. At work I am a pitbull who doesn’t let go until a task is completed. When it comes to work for myself, though, I’ve never been so determined. I believe the only thing I’ve completed for myself has been a homemade music album; a horrible work, of course! I will spare your ears from it…

This time I gave 120% to finish my project, always repeating this mantra in my head:

“Done is better than perfect!”

And you know what I think? TPC is perfect, to me. It is my child! I love it! For me, this book is perfect with all of its perfect imperfections! No matter what. I guess this is what they mean by “unconditional love”.

I did everything for this book:

I wrote it
I edited it
I designed the layout and the cover (including the mysterious code on the back cover)
I created a nice website for it
I even minted NFTs about it
I did everything, expect the proofreading. That’s obvious. You can’t proofread your own writing.

I don’t know where this book will take me, but I’m ready to embrace whatever comes to my way. I feel President Corona will take me through crazy adventures and I already anticipate that radicals will target me somehow. Already today, a lady texted me in private to know more about the book, but then she asked me: “Are you vaxxed?” LOL!

I missed the chance to crack a joke: “Yes, but don’t worry. I was already autistic!”
Well, maybe I am for real. I’ve never taken the test, but I suspect I’ve always been in some autistic spectrum, in spite of my public image that mistakenly portrays me as an extrovert and sociable dude. In reality, I’m extremely introverted, and I’ve always struggled with social interactions, more than folks might imagine. But, I am improving in that too.

I wouldn’t mind to discover to be autistic. I think it can even be a bless. I know how it feels to be labeled as different. I suffered a lot from it, but it can be wonderful if you surround yourself with the right people, who can appreciate your uniqueness. When you are covered by the right folks, you understand that you are not “different”. The others are all the same…

My “different” look at the world is what helped me to conceive a book like “Thank You, President Corona!”. In my diversity, I saw in the pandemic the opportunity of a lifetime. It was an apocalypse, yeah, but it’s from the apocalypse that new gods rise from.

Call me a freak, but the first image that passed in my mind during March 2020 was the opening of Tekken 6. There is a sort of WWIII, and at the end of it, only the best fighters on the planet have survived, ready for the ultimate Tournament of the Iron Fist! I wanted to be like them. This meant starting to work out seriously, even with gyms closed, especially with gyms closed. It was COVID-19 time. No more excuses…
The goal was clear: to get out of the pandemic alive, and as a better person than I was when I entered it.
3 years later I can say that I accomplished and even exceeded the goal! That’s what I’m proud of! :)))

There’s nothing noble in being better than someone else. Real nobility is to be better than who you were yesterday!

I feel OK, I feel good, I feel I’m heading in the right direction with my life. Probably, I don’t realize yet what I have accomplished. I just enjoy the present moment for what it is! :)

And that’s enough for my on-the-spot ranting! I wanted to share with you fresh sensations, without editing and embellishing these feelings too much. I think it’s the first Medium article I write and publish right away!

Cheers! Or “Saude” as they say in Portugal!